# Module 12: Creating Reusable Types and Assemblies

## Lab: Specifying the Data to Include in the Grades Report

### Lab Setup

Estimated Time: **75 minutes**

### Preparation Steps

1. Ensure that you have cloned the 20483C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for this course's labs and demos. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20483-Programming-in-C-Sharp/tree/master/Allfiles**)
2. Initialize database:
   - In the **Apps** list, click **File Explorer**.
   - Navigate to the **[Repository Root]\AllFilesMod12\Labfiles\Databases** folder, and then double-click **SetupSchoolGradesDB.cmd**.
        > **NOTE :** If a Windows protected your PC dialog appears, click **More info** and then click **Run Anyway**.  
   - Close **File Explorer**.

### Exercise 1: Creating and Applying the IncludeInReport attribute

#### Task 1: Write the code for the IncludeInReportAttribute class

1. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **Grades.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    > **Note:** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click Solution **‘Grades’**, and then click **Properties**.
5. On the **Startup Project** page, click **Multiple startup projects**, set **Grades.Web** and **Grades.WPF** to **Start**, and then click **OK**.
6. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.Utilities**, and then double-click **IncludeInReport.cs**.
7. On the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
8. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1a: Specify that IncludeInReportAttribute is an attribute class** task.
9. In the code editor, below the comment, click at the end of the public **public class IncludeInReportAttribute** code, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    : Attribute
    ```
10. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1b: Specify the possible targets to which the IncludeInReport attribute can be applied** task.
11. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    [AttributeUsage(AttributeTargets.Field | AttributeTargets.Property, AllowMultiple = false)]
    ```
12. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1c: Define a private field to hold the value of the attribute** task.
13. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    private bool _include;
    ```
14. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1d: Add public properties that specify how an included item should be formatted** task.
15. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public bool Underline { get; set; }
    public bool Bold { get; set; }
    ```
16. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1e: Add a public property that specifies a label (if any) for the item** task.
17. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public string Label { get; set; }
    ```
18. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1f: Define constructors** task.
19. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public IncludeInReportAttribute()
    {
        this._include = true;
        this.Underline = false;
        this.Bold = false;
        this.Label = string.Empty;
    }

    public IncludeInReportAttribute(bool includeInReport)
    {
        this._include = includeInReport;
        this.Underline = false;
        this.Bold = false;
        this.Label = string.Empty;
    }
    ```

#### Task 2: Apply the IncludeInReportAttribute attribute to the appropriate properties

1. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.WPF**, and then double-click **Data.cs**.
2. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2: Add the IncludeInReport attribute to the appropriate properties in the LocalGrade class** task.
3. In the **LocalGrade** class, expand the **Properties** region, and then expand the **Readonly Properties** region.
4. Above the **public string SubjectName** code, click in the blank line, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    [IncludeInReport(Label="Subject Name", Bold=true, Underline=true)]
    ```
5. Above the **public string AssessmentDateString** code, click in the blank line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    [IncludeInReport (Label="Date")]
    ```
6. Expand the **Form Properties** region.
7. Above the **public string Assessment** code, click in the blank line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    [IncludeInReport(Label = "Grade")]
    ```
8. Above the **public string Comments** code, click in the blank space, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    [IncludeInReport(Label = "Comments")]
    ```

#### Task 3: Build the application and review the metadata for the LocalGrades class

1. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Debugging**.
2. Close the application.
3. Open **File Explorer** and browse to the **C:\Program Files (x86)\Microsoft SDKs\Windows\v10.0A\bin\NETFX 4.7 Tools** folder.
    > **Note:** NETFX version might be higher than 4
4. Right-click **ildasm.exe,** and then click **Open**.
5. In the **IL DASM** window, on the **File** menu, click **Open**.
6. In the **Open** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1\Grades.WPF\bin\Debug**, click **Grades.WPF.exe**, and then click **Open**.
7. In the **IL DASM** application window, expand **Grades.WPF,** expand **Grades.WPF.LocalGrade**, and then double-click **Assessment : instance string()**.
8. In the **Grades.WPF.LocalGrade::Assessment : instance string()** window, in the **Assessment** method, verify that the **.custom instance void [Grades.Utilities]Grades.Utilities.IncludeInReportAttribute::.ctor()** code is present, and then close the window.
9. In the **IL DASM** application window, double-click **AssessmentDateString : instance string()**.
10. In the **Grades.WPF.LocalGrade::AssessmentDateString : instance string()** window, in the **AssessmentDateString** method, verify that the **.custom instance void [Grades.Utilities]Grades.Utilities.IncludeInReportAttribute::.ctor()** code is present, and then close the window.
11. In the **IL DASM** application window, double-click **Comments : instance string()**.
12. In the **Grades.WPF.LocalGrade::Comments : instance string()** window, in the **Comments** method, verify that the **.custom instance void [Grades.Utilities]Grades.Utilities.IncludeInReportAttribute::.ctor()** code is present, and then close the window.
13. In the **IL DASM** application window, double-click **SubjectName : instance string();**.
14. In the **Grades.WPF.LocalGrade::SubjectName : instance string()** window, in the **SubjectName** method, verify that the **.custom instance void [Grades.Utilities]Grades.Utilities.IncludeInReportAttribute::.ctor()** code is present, and then close the window.
15. Close the **IL DASM** application.
16. Close **File Explorer**.
17. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

> **Result:** After completing this exercise, the **Grades.Utilities** assembly will contain an **IncludeInReport** custom attribute and the **Grades** class will contain fields and properties that are tagged with that attribute.

### Exercise 2: Updating the Report

#### Task 1: Implement a static helper class called IncludeProcessor

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **Grades.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    > **Note:** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click Solution **‘Grades’**, and then click **Properties**.
4. On the **Startup Project** page, click **Multiple startup projects**, set **Grades.Web** and **Grades.WPF** to **Start**, and then click **OK**.
5. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.Utilities**, and then double-click **IncludeInReport.cs**.
6. Below the **Output** window, click **Task List**.
7. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1a: Define a struct that specifies the formatting to apply to an item** task.
8. In the code editor, click in the blank line in the **FormatField** struct, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public string Value;
    public string Label;
    public bool IsBold;
    public bool IsUnderlined;
    ```
9. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1b: Find all the public fields and properties in the dataForReport object** task.
10. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    Type dataForReportType = dataForReport.GetType();
    fieldsAndProperties.AddRange(dataForReportType.GetFields());
    fieldsAndProperties.AddRange(dataForReportType.GetProperties());
    ```
11. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1c: Iterate through all public fields and properties, and process each item that is tagged with the IncludeInReport attribute** task.
12. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    foreach (MemberInfo member in fieldsAndProperties)
    {
    ```
13. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1d: Determine whether the current member is tagged with the IncludeInReport attribute** task.
14. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    object[] attributes = member.GetCustomAttributes(false);
    IncludeInReportAttribute attributeFound = Array.Find(attributes, a => a.GetType() == typeof(IncludeInReportAttribute)) as IncludeInReportAttribute;
    ```
15. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1e: If the member is tagged with the IncludeInReport attribute, construct a FormatField item** task.
16. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (attributeFound != null)
    {
        // Find the value of the item tagged with the IncludeInReport attribute
        string itemValue;
        if (member is FieldInfo)
        {
            itemValue = (member as FieldInfo).GetValue(dataForReport).ToString();
        }
        else
        {
            itemValue = (member as PropertyInfo).GetValue(dataForReport).ToString();
        }
    ```
17. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1f: Construct a FormatField item with this data** task.
18. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    FormatField item = new FormatField()
    {
        Value = itemValue,
        Label = attributeFound.Label,
        IsBold = attributeFound.Bold,
        IsUnderlined = attributeFound.Underline
    };
    ```
19. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1g: Add the FormatField item to the collection to be returned** task.
20. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
           items.Add(item);
        }
    }
    ```

#### Task 2: Update the report functionality for the StudentProfile view

1. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.WPF**, expand **Views**, expand **StudentProfile.xaml**, and then double-click **StudentProfile.xaml.cs**.
2. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2a: Use the IncludeProcessor to determine which fields in the Grade object are tagged** task.
3. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    List<FormatField> itemsToReport = IncludeProcessor.GetItemsToInclude(grade);
    ```
4. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2b: Output each tagged item, using the format specified by the properties of the IncludeInReport attribute for each item** task.
5. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    foreach (FormatField item in itemsToReport)
    {
        wrapper.AppendText(item.Label == string.Empty ? item.Value : item.Label + ": " + item.Value, item.IsBold, item.IsUnderlined);

        wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
    }
    ```

#### Task 3: Build and test the application

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. In the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. In the **Class 3C** view, click **Kevin Liu**.
5. Verify that the student report for **Kevin Liu** appears, and then click **save report**.
6. In the **Save As** dialog box, browse to the **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2** folder.
7. In the **File name** text box, type **KevinLiuGradesReport**, and then click **Save**.
8. Close the application.
9. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.
10. Open **File Explorer**, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, and then verify that **KevinLiuGradesReport.docx** has been generated.
11. Right-click **KevinLiuGradesReport.docx**, and then click **Open**.
12. Verify that the document contains the grade report for **Kevin Liu** and that it is correctly formatted, and then close**Microsoft Word**.

> **Result:** After completing this exercise, the application will be updated to use reflection to include only the tagged fields and properties in the grades report.

### Exercise 3: Storing the Grades.Utilities Assembly Centrally (if time permits)

#### Task 1: Sign the Grades.Utilities assembly and deploy it to the General Assembly Cache (GAC)

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**, click **Grades.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    > **Note:** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Solution ‘Grades’**, and then click **Properties**.
4. On the **Startup Project** page, click **Multiple startup projects**, set **Grades.Web** and **Grades.WPF** to **Start**, and then click **OK**.
5. Switch to **Windows 10**.
6. Go to **Apps** list and click **File Explorer**.
7. Search **Developer Command Prompt for VS 2017** and right-click the **Developer Command Prompt for VS 2017** icon and click **Run as administrator**.
8. In the **User Account Control** dialog box, click on **Yes**.
9. In the **Command Prompt** window, type the following code, and then press Enter:
    ```cs
    cd [Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter
    ```
10. In the **Command Prompt** window, type the following code, and then press Enter:
    ```cs
    sn -k GradesKey.snk
    ```
11. Verify that the text **Key pair written to GradesKey.snk** is displayed.
12. In **Visual Studio**, in **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Grades.Utilities**, and then click **Properties**.
13. On the **Signing** tab, select **Sign the assembly**.
14. In the **Choose a strong name key file** list, click **Browse**.
15. In the **Select File** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter**, click **GradesKey.snk**, and then click **Open**.
16. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
17. Switch to the **Command Prompt** window, type the following code, and then press Enter:
    ```cs
    cd "[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3\Grades.Utilities\bin\Debug"
    ```
18. In the **Command Prompt** window, type the following code, and then press Enter:
    ```cs
    gacutil -i Grades.Utilities.dll
    ```
19. Verify that the text **Assembly successfully added to the cache** is displayed, and then close the **Command Prompt** window.

#### Task 2: Reference the Grades.Utilities assembly in the GAC from the application

1. In **Visual Studio**, in **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.WPF**, expand **References**, right-click **Grades.Utilities**, and then click **Remove**.
2. Right-click **References**, and then click **Add Reference**.
3. In the **Reference Manager – Grades.WPF** dialog box, click the **Browse** button.
4. In the **Select the files to reference** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3\Grades.Utilities\bin\Debug**,
    click **Grades.Utilities.dll**, and then click **Add**.
5. In the **Reference Manager – Grades.WPF** dialog box, click **OK**.
6. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
7. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
8. In the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
9. In the **Class 3C** view, click **Kevin Liu**.
10. Verify that the student report for **Kevin Liu** appears, and then click **save report**.
11. In the **Save As** dialog box, browse to the **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3** folder.
12. In the **File name** text box, type **KevinLiuGradesReport**, and then click **Save**.
13. Close the application.
14. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.
15. Open **File Explorer**, browse to **[Repository Root]\AllFiles\Mod12\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**,
    and then verify that **KevinLiuGradesReport.docx** has been generated.
16. Right-click **KevinLiuGradesReport.docx**, and then click **Open**.
17. Verify that the document contains the grade report for **Kevin Liu** and that it is correctly formatted, and then close **Word**.

> **Result:** After completing this exercise, you will have a signed version of the **Grades.Utilities** assembly deployed to the GAC.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
