
# Module 7: Accessing a Database

## Lab: Retrieving and Modifying Grade Data

### Lab Setup

Estimated Time: **60 minutes**

### Preparation Steps

Ensure that you have cloned the 20483C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for this course's labs and demos. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20483-Programming-in-C-Sharp/tree/master/Allfiles**)

### Exercise 1: Creating an Entity Data Model from The School of Fine Arts Database

#### Task 1: Build and generate an EDM by using a table from the SchoolGradesDB database

1. Navigate to the **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod07\Labfiles\Databases** folder, and then double-click **SetupSchoolGradesDB.cmd**.
2. Close **File Explorer**, If a Windows protected your PC dialog appears, click **More info** and then click **Run Anyway**.
3. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
4. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
5. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod07\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
6. On the **File** menu, point to **New**, and then click **Project**.
7. In the **New Project** dialog box, in the **Installed** list, click **Visual C\#**, and then click **Class Library(.NET Framework)**.
8. In the **Name** text box, type **Grades.DataModel**, and then click **OK**.
9. Right-click the **Grades.DataModel** project, point to **Add** and then click **New Item**
10. In the **Add New Item – Grades.DataModel** dialog box, in the templates list, click **ADO.NET Entity Data Model**.
11. In the **Name** text box, type **GradesModel**, and then click **Add**.
12. In the **Entity Data Model Wizard**, on the **Choose Model Contents** page, click **EF Designer from database**, and then click **Next**ץ
13. On the **Choose Your Data Connection** page, click **New Connection**.
14. If the **Choose Data Source** dialog box appears, in the **Data source** list, click **Microsoft SQL Server**, and then click **Continue**.
15. In the **Connection Properties** dialog box, in the **Server name** text box, type **(localdb)\MSSQLLocalDB**.
16. In the **Select or enter a database name** list, click **SchoolGradesDB**, and then click **OK**.
17. In the **Entity Data Model Wizard**, on the **Choose Your Data Connection** page, click **Next**.
18. On the **Choose Your Version** page, choose **Entity Framework 6.x**, and then click **Next**.
19. On the **Choose Your Database Objects and Settings** page, expand **Tables**, expand **dbo**, select the following tables, and then click **Finish**:
    - **Grades**
    - **Students**
    - **Subjects**
    - **Teachers**
    - **Users**
20. If the **Security Warning** dialog box appears, click **Do not show this message again**, and then click **OK**.
21. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.

#### Task 2: Review the generated code

1. In the **Designer** window, review the entities that have been generated.
2. Review the properties and navigation properties of the **Grade** entity.
3. Right-click the heading of the **Grades** entity, and then click **Table Mapping**.
4. In the **Mapping Details – Grades** pane, review the mappings between the columns in the database table and the properties of the entity.
5. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **GradesModel.edmx**, expand **GradesModel.Context.tt**, and then double-click **GradesModel.Context.cs**.
6. In the **Code** window, note that the wizard has created a **DbContext** object named **SchoolGradesDBEntities**.
7. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **GradesModel.tt**, and then double-click **Grades.cs**.
8. Note that the wizard has created one property for each column in the **Grades** database table.
9. On the **File** menu, click **Save All**.
10. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, the prototype application should include an Entity Data Manager (EDM) that you can use to access the **The School of Fine Arts** database.

### Exercise 2: Updating Student and Grade Data by Using the Entity Framework

#### Task 1: Display grades for the current student

1. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod07\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **GradesPrototype**, and then click **Set as StartUp Project**.
5. On the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
6. In the **Task List** window, in the **Categories** drop-down box, choose **Entire Solution**.
7. Double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1a: Find all the grades for the student.** task.
8. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    List<Grades.DataModel.Grade> grades = new List<Grades.DataModel.Grade>();

    foreach (Grades.DataModel.Grade grade in SessionContext.DBContext.Grades)
    {
       if (grade.StudentUserId == SessionContext.CurrentStudent.UserId)
       {
          grades.Add(grade);
       }
    }
    ```
9. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1b: Display the grades in the studentGrades ItemsControl by using databinding.** task.
10. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    studentGrades.ItemsSource = grades;
    ```
11. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
12. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
13. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
14. In the **Class 3C** view, click **Kevin Liu**.
15. Verify that Kevin Liu’s grades are listed.
16. Note that the **subject** column uses the subject ID rather than the subject name, and then close the application.

#### Task 2: Display the subject name in the UI

1. In **Visual Studio**, in the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2a: Convert the subject ID provided in the value parameter** task.
2. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    int subjectId = (int)value;
    var subject = SessionContext.DBContext.Subjects.FirstOrDefault(s => s.Id == subjectId);
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2b: Return the subject name or the string “N/A”** task.
4. In the code editor, delete the following line of code:
    ```cs
    return value;
    ```
5. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    return subject.Name != string.Empty ? subject.Name : "N/A";
    ```
6. Save the file.

#### Task 3: Display the GradeDialog view and use the input to add a new grade

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3a: Use the GradeDialog to get the details of the new grade** task.
2. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    GradeDialog gd = new GradeDialog();
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3b: Display the form and get the details of the new grade** task.
4. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (gd.ShowDialog().Value)
    {
    ```
5. Click in the blank line below the final TODO comment in this **try** block, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    }
    ```
6. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3c: When the user closes the form, retrieve the details of the assessment grade from the form and use them to create a new Grade object** task.
7. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    Grades.DataModel.Grade newGrade = new Grades.DataModel.Grade();
    newGrade.AssessmentDate = gd.assessmentDate.SelectedDate.Value;
    newGrade.SubjectId = gd.subject.SelectedIndex;
    newGrade.Assessment = gd.assessmentGrade.Text;
    newGrade.Comments = gd.comments.Text;
    newGrade.StudentUserId = SessionContext.CurrentStudent.UserId;
    ```
8. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3d: Save the grade** task.
9. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    SessionContext.DBContext.Grades.Add(newGrade);
    SessionContext.Save();
    ```
10. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3e: Refresh the display so that the new grade appears** task.
11. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    Refresh();
    ```

#### Task 4: Run the application and test the grade-adding functionality

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. In the **Class 3C** view, click **Kevin Liu**.
5. Verify that the list of grades now displays the subject name, not the subject ID.
6. In the **Report Card** view, click **Add Grade**.
7. In the **New Grade Details** dialog box, in the **Subject** list, click **Geography**, in the **Assessment** text box, type **A+**, in the **Comments** text box, type **Well done!**, and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that the new grade is added to the list, and then close the application.
9. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, users will see the grades for the current student and add new grades.

### Exercise 3: Extending the Entity Data Model to Validate Data

#### Task 1: Throw the ClassFullException exception

1. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod07\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **GradesPrototype**, and then click **Set as StartUp Project**.
5. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Grades.DataModel** project, point to **Add**, and then click **Class**.
6. In the **Add New Item – Grades.DataModel** dialog box, in the **Name** text box, type **customTeacher.cs**, and then click **Add**.
7. In the code editor, modify the class declaration as shown in the following code:
    ```cs
    public partial class Teacher
    ```
8. In the code editor, in the **Teacher** class, type the following code:
    ```cs
    private const int MAX_CLASS_SIZE = 8;
    ```
9. In the code editor, in the **Teacher** class, type the following code:
    ```cs
    public void EnrollInClass(Student student)
    {
        // Verify that this teacher's class is not already full.
        // Determine how many students are currently in the class.
        int numStudents = (from s in Students
                           where s.TeacherUserId == UserId
                           select s).Count();

        // If the class is already full, another student cannot be enrolled.
        if (numStudents >= MAX_CLASS_SIZE)
        {
            // So throw a ClassFullException and specify the class that is full.
            throw new ClassFullException("Class full: Unable to enroll student", Class);
        }
        // Verify that the student is not already enrolled in another class.
        if (student.TeacherUserId == null)
        {
            // Set the TeacherID property of the student.
            student.TeacherUserId = UserId;
        }
        else
        {
            // If the student is already assigned to a class, throw an ArgumentException.
            throw new ArgumentException("Student", "Student is already assigned to a class");
        }
    }
    ```
10. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 1a: Call the EnrollInClass method to assign the student to this teacher’s class** task.
11. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    SessionContext.CurrentTeacher.EnrollInClass(student);
    ```
12. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 1b: Save the updated student/class information back to the database** task.
13. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    SessionContext.Save();
    ```

#### Task 2: Add validation logic for the Assessment and AssessmentDate properties

1. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Grades.DataModel**, point to **Add**, and then click **Class**.
2. In the **Add New Item – Grades.DataModel** dialog box, in the **Name** text box, type **customGrade.cs**, and then click **Add**.
3. In the code editor, modify the class declaration as shown in the following code:
    ```cs
    public partial class Grade
    ```
4. In the code editor, in the **Grade** class, type the following code:
    ```cs
    public bool ValidateAssessmentDate(DateTime assessmentDate)
    {
        // Verify that the user has provided a valid date.
        // Check that the date is no later than the current date.
        if (assessmentDate > DateTime.Now)
        {
            // Throw an ArgumentOutOfRangeException if the date is after the current date.
            throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException("Assessment Date", "Assessment date must be on or before the current date");
        }
        else
        {
            return true;
        }
    }
    ```
5. In the code editor, below the existing **using** directives, type the following code:
    ```cs
    using System.Text.RegularExpressions;
    ```
6. In the code editor, in the **Grade** class, type the following code:
    ```cs
    public bool ValidateAssessmentGrade(string assessment)
    {
        // Verify that the grade is in the range A+ to E-.
        // Use a regular expression: A single character in the range A-E at the start of the string followed by an optional + or - at the end of the string.
        Match matchGrade = Regex.Match(assessment, @"^[A-E][+-]?$");

        if (!matchGrade.Success)
        {
            // If the grade is not valid, throw an ArgumentOutOfRangeException.
            throw new ArgumentOutOfRangeException("Assessment", "Assessment grade must be in the range A+ to E-");
        }
        else
        {
            return true;
        }
    }
    ```
7. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2a: Create a Grade object.** task.
8. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    Grades.DataModel.Grade testGrade = new Grades.DataModel.Grade();
    ```
9. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2b: Call the ValidateAssessmentDate method** task.
10. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    testGrade.ValidateAssessmentDate(assessmentDate.SelectedDate.Value);
    ```
11. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2c: Call the ValidateAssessmentGrade** task.
12. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    testGrade.ValidateAssessmentGrade(assessmentGrade.Text);
    ```

#### Task 3: Run the application and test the validation logic

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. When the application loads, click **Enroll Student**.
5. In the **Assign Student** dialog box, click **Eric Gruber**, in the **Confirm** message box, click **Yes**, and then in the **Error enrolling student** message box, click **OK**.
6. In the **Unassign Student** dialog box, click **Close**.
7. In the **Class 3C** view, click **Kevin Liu**, and then click **Add Grade**.
8. In the **New Grade Details** dialog box, in the **Date** text box, type tomorrow’s date, and then click **OK**.
9. In the **Error creating assessment** message box, click **OK**.
10. In the **New Grade Details** dialog box, in the **Date** text box, type **8/19/2012**, in the **Assessment** text box, type **F+**, and then click **OK**.
11. In the **Error creating assessment** message box, click **OK**.
12. In the **New Grade Details** dialog box, in the **Assessment** text box, type **A+**, in the **Comments** text box, type **Well done!**, and then click **OK**.
13. Verify that the new grade is added to the list, and then close the application.
14. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, the application will raise and handle exceptions when invalid data is entered.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
