
# Module 5: Creating a Class Hierarchy by Using Inheritance

## Lab: Refactoring Common Functionality into the User Class

### Lab Setup

Estimated Time: **60 minutes**

### Preparation Steps

Ensure that you have cloned the 20483C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for this course's labs and demos. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20483-Programming-in-C-Sharp/tree/master/Allfiles**)

### Exercise 1: Creating and Inheriting from the User Base Class

#### Task 1: Create the User abstract base class

1. Click **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. In **Visual Studio**, on the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
5. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1a: Create the User abstract class with the common functionality for Teachers and Students** task.
6. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public abstract class User
    {
    ```
7. Click at the end of the last comment in the block (before the **Grade** class declaration), press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    }
    ```
8. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1b: Add the UserName property to the User class** task.
9. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public string UserName { get; set; }
    ```
10. In the **Task List** window, double click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1c: Add the Password property to the User class** task.
11. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    private string _password = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(); // Generate a random password by default

    public string Password
    {
       set
       {
          _password = value;
       }
    }
    ```
12. In the **Task List** window, double click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1d: Add the VerifyPassword method to the User class** task.
13. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public bool VerifyPassword(string pass)
    {
       return (String.Compare(pass, _password) == 0);
    }
    ```

#### Task 2: Modify the Student and Teacher classes to inherit from the User class

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2a: Inherit from the User class** task.
2. In the code editor, modify the statement below this comment as shown below in bold:
    ```cs
    public class Student: User, IComparable<Student>
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2b: Remove the UserName property (now inherited from User)** task.
4. In the code editor, delete the following statement from below the comment:
    ```cs
    public string UserName { get; set; }
    ```
5. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2c: Remove the Password property (now inherited from User)** task.
6. In the code editor, delete the following block of code from below the comment:
    ```cs
    private string _password = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(); // Generate a random password by default

    public string Password
    {
        set
        {
            _password = value;
        }
    }
    ```
7. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2d Remove the VerifyPassword method (now inherited from User)** task.
8. In the code editor, delete the following method from below the comment:
    ```cs
    public bool VerifyPassword(string pass)
    {
        return (String.Compare(pass, _password) == 0);
    }
    ```
9. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2e: Inherit from the User class** task.
10. In the code editor, modify the statement below this comment as shown below in bold:
    ```cs
    public class Teacher: User
    ```
11. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2f: Remove the UserName property (now inherited from User)** task.
12. In the code editor, delete the following statement from below the comment:
    ```cs
    public string UserName { get; set; }
    ```
13. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2g: Remove the Password property (now inherited from User)** task.
14. In the code editor, delete the following block of code from below the comment:
    ```cs
    private string _password = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(); // Generate a random password by default

    public string Password
    {
        set
        {
            _password = value;
        }
    }
    ```
15. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2h Remove the VerifyPassword method (now inherited from User)** task.
16. In the code editor, delete the following method from below the comment:
    ```cs
    public bool VerifyPassword(string pass)
    {
        return (String.Compare(pass, _password) == 0);
    }
    ```

#### Task 3: Run the application and test the log on functionality

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application starts, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, in the **Password** text box, type **password**, and then click **Log on**.
4. Verify that the list of students for teacher **Esther Valle** is displayed.
5. Click **Kevin Liu**, and verify that the report card with the grades for **Kevin Liu** is displayed.
6. Click **Log off**.
7. In the **Username** text box, type **liuk**, in the **Password** text box, type **password**, and then click **Log on**.
8. Verify that the report card showing the grades for **Kevin Liu** is displayed again.
9. Click **Log off**.
10. Close the application.
11. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, you should have removed the duplicated code from the **Student** and **Teacher** classes, and moved the code to an abstract base class called **User**.

### Exercise 2: Implementing Password Complexity by Using an Abstract Method

#### Task 1: Define the SetPassword abstract method

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. In **Visual Studio**, on the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
4. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1a: Define an abstract method for setting the password** task.
5. In the code editor, review the comment below this line, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public abstract bool SetPassword(string pwd);
    ```
6. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 1b: Use the SetPassword method to set the password** task.
7. In the code editor, delete the following statement:
    ```cs
    _password = value;
    ```
8. Add the following block of code in the place of the statement that you just deleted:
    ```cs
    if (!SetPassword(value))
    {
        throw new ArgumentException("Password not complex enough", "Password");
    }
    ```

#### Task 2: Implement the SetPassword method in the Student and Teacher classes

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2a: Make _password a protected field rather than private** task.
2. In the code editor, modify the statement below the comment as shown below in bold:
    ```cs
    protected string _password = Guid.NewGuid().ToString(); // Generate a random password by default
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2b: Implement SetPassword to set the password for the student** task.
4. In the code editor, review the comment below this line, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public override bool SetPassword(string pwd)
    {
        // If the password provided as the parameter is at least 6 characters long then save it and return true
        if (pwd.Length >= 6)
        {
            _password = pwd;
            return true;
        }
        // If the password is not long enough, then do not save it and return false
        return false;
    }
    ```
5. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2c: Implement SetPassword to set the password for the teacher** task.
6. In the code editor, review the comment below this line, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public override bool SetPassword(string pwd)
    {
        // Use a regular expression to check that the password contains at least two numeric characters
        Match numericMatch = Regex.Match(pwd, @".*[0-9]+.*[0-9]+.*");

        // If the password provided as the parameter is at least 8 characters long and contains at least two numeric characters then save it and return true
        if (pwd.Length >= 8 && numericMatch.Success)
        {
            _password = pwd;
            return true;
        }
        // If the password is not complex enough, then do not save it and return false
        return false;
    }
    ```

#### Task 3: Set the password for a new student

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3a: Use the SetPassword method to set the password.** task.
2. In the code editor, delete the statement below this comment and replace it with the following block of code:
    ```cs
    if (!newStudent.SetPassword(sd.password.Text))
    {
        throw new Exception("Password must be at least 6 characters long. Student not created");
    }
    ```

#### Task 4: Change the password for an existing user

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. In **Solution Explorer**, expand the **GradesPrototype** project, and then double-click **MainWindow.xaml**.
3. In the XAML editor, scroll down to line 27 and review the following block of XAML code:
    ```xml
    <Button Grid.Column="2" Margin="5" HorizontalAlignment="Right" Click="ChangePassword_Click">
        <TextBlock Text="Change Password" FontSize="24"/>
    </Button>
    ```
4. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **MainWindow.xaml** and then double-click **MainWindow.xaml.cs**.
5. In the code editor, expand the **Event Handlers** region, and locate the **ChangePassword_Click**method.
6. Review the code in this method:
    ```cs
    private void ChangePassword_Click(object sender, EventArgs e)
    {
        // Use the ChangePasswordDialog to change the user's password
        ChangePasswordDialog cpd = new ChangePasswordDialog();

        // Display the dialog
        if (cpd.ShowDialog().Value)
        {
            // When the user closes the dialog by using the OK button, the password should have been changed
            // Display a message to confirm
            MessageBox.Show("Password changed", "Password", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Information);
        }
    }
    ```
7. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Controls**, and then double-click **ChangePasswordDialog.xaml**.
8. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **ChangePasswordDialog.xaml** and then double-click **ChangePasswordDialog.xaml.cs**.
9. Review the code in the **ok_Click** method:
    ```cs
    // If the user clicks OK to change the password, validate the information that the user has provided
    private void ok_Click(object sender, RoutedEventArgs e)
    {
        // TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4a: Get the details of the current user

        // TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4b: Check that the old password is correct for the current user

        // TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4c: Check that the new password and confirm password fields are the same

        // TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4d: Attempt to change the password
        // If the password is not sufficiently complex, display an error message

        // Indicate that the data is valid
        this.DialogResult = true;
    }
    ```
10. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4a: Get the details of the current user** task.
11. In the code editor, in the blank line below this comment, type the following code:
    ```cs
    User currentUser;

    if (SessionContext.UserRole == Role.Teacher)
    {
        currentUser = SessionContext.CurrentTeacher;
    }
    else
    {
        currentUser = SessionContext.CurrentStudent;
    }
    ```
12. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4b: Check that the old password is correct for the current user** task.
13. In the code editor, in the blank line below this comment, type the following code:
    ```cs
    string oldPwd = oldPassword.Password;

    if (!currentUser.VerifyPassword(oldPwd))
    {
        MessageBox.Show("Old password is incorrect", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```
14. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4c: Check that the new password and confirm password fields are the same** task.
15. In the code editor, in the blank line below this comment, type the following code:
    ```cs
    string newPwd = newPassword.Password;
    string confirmPwd = confirm.Password;

    if (String.Compare(newPwd, confirmPwd) != 0)
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The new password and confirm password fields are different", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```
16. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 4d: Attempt to change the password** task.
17. In the code editor, review the comment below this line, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (!currentUser.SetPassword(newPwd))
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The new password is not sufficiently complex", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```

#### Task 5: Run the application and test the change password functionality

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application starts, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. In the **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **Change Password**.
5. In the **Change Password Dialog** window, in the **Old Password** text box, type **password99**, in the **New Password** text box, type **pwd101**, in the **Confirm** text box, type **pwd101**, and then click **OK**.
6. Verify that the message **The new password is not sufficiently complex** is displayed, and then click **OK**.
7. In the **New Password** text box, type **password101**, in the **Confirm** text box, type **password101**, and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that the message **Password changed** is displayed, and then click **OK**.
9. Click **Log off**.
10. In the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, in the **Password** text box, type **password101**, and then click **Log on**.
11. Click **New Student**.
12. In the **New Student Details** window, in the **First Name** text box, type **Luka**, in the **Last Name** text box, type **Abrus**, in the **Password** text box, type **1234**, and then click **OK**.
13. Verify that the message **Password must be at least 6 characters long. Student not created** appears, and then click **OK**.
14. Click **New Student**.
15. In the **New Student Details** window, in the **First Name** text box, type **Luka**, in the **Last Name** text box, type **Abrus**, in the **Password** text box, type **abcdef**, and then click **OK**.
16. Click **Enroll Student**.
17. In the **Assign Student** window, verify that the student **Luka Abrus** appears.
18. Click **Close**.
19. Click **Log off**.
20. Close the application.
21. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, you should have implemented a polymorphic method named **SetPassword** that changes behavior based on whether the user is a student or s teacher. You will also have modified the application to enable users to change their passwords.

### Exercise 3: Creating the ClassFullException Custom Exception

#### Task 1: Implement the ClassFullException class

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod05\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**, click **GradesPrototype.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. In **Visual Studio**, on the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
4. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 1a: Add custom data: the name of the class that is full** task.
5. In the code editor, review the comment below this task, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    private string _className;
    public virtual string ClassName
    {
        get
        {
            return _className;
        }
    }
    ```
6. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 1b: Delegate functionality for the common constructors directly to the Exception class** task.
7. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public ClassFullException()
    {
    }

    public ClassFullException(string message)
        : base(message)
    {
    }

    public ClassFullException(string message, Exception inner)
        : base(message, inner)
    {
    }
    ```
8. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 1c: Add custom constructors that populate the _className field.** task.
9. In the code editor, review the comment below this task, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public ClassFullException(string message, string cls)
        : base(message)
    {
        _className = cls;
    }

    public ClassFullException(string message, string cls, Exception inner)
        : base(message, inner)
    {
        _className = cls;
    }
    ```

#### Task 2: Throw and catch the ClassFullException

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2a: Set the maximum class size for any teacher** task.
2. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    private const int MAX_CLASS_SIZE = 8;
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2b: If the class is already full, then another student cannot be enrolled** task.
4. In the code editor, review the comment below this task, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (numStudents == MAX_CLASS_SIZE)
    {
        // Throw a ClassFullException and specify the class that is full
        throw new ClassFullException("Class full: Unable to enroll student", Class);
    }
    ```
5. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2c: Catch and handle the ClassFullException** task.
6. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    catch (ClassFullException cfe)
    {
        MessageBox.Show(String.Format("{0}. Class: {1}", cfe.Message, cfe.ClassName), "Error enrolling student", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
    }
    ```

#### Task 3: Build and test the solution

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application starts, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. In **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **New Student**.
5. In the **New Student Details** window, enter the following details, and then click **OK**.
    
    | **Field**    | **Value**  |
    | -------------|:----------:|
    | First Name   | **Walter** |
    | Last Name    |**Harp**    |
    | Password     | **abcdef** |  
    >**Note:** New students will not be listed in the main application window because this displays students in the **Users** class, and the new students are yet to be assigned to a class.
6. In the **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **New Student**.
7. In the **New Student Details** window, enter the following details, and then click **OK**.
    
    | **Field**    | **Value**  |
    | -------------|:----------:|
    | First Name   | **Andrew** |
    | Last Name    | **Harris** |
    | Password     | **abcdef** |
8. In the **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **New Student**.
9. In the **New Student Details** window, enter the following details, and then click **OK**.
    
    | **Field**    | **Value**  |
    | -------------|:----------:|
    | First Name   | **Toni**   |
    | Last Name    | **Poe**    |
    | Password     | **abcdef** |
10. In the **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **New Student**.
11. In the **New Student Details** window, enter the following details, and then click **OK**.
    
    | **Field**    | **Value**   |
    | -------------|:-----------:|
    | First Name   | **Ben**     |
    | Last Name    | **Andrews** |
    | Password     | **abcdef**  |
12. In the **The School of Fine Arts** window, click **Enroll Student**.
13. In the **Assign Student** window, click **Walter Harp**.
14. In the **Confirm** message box, click **Yes**.
15. In the **Assign Student** window, click **Andrew Harris**.
16. In the **Confirm** message box, click **Yes**.
17. In the **Assign Student** window, click **Toni Poe**.
18. In the **Confirm** message box, click **Yes**.
19. In the **Assign Student** window, click **Ben Andrews**.
20. In the **Confirm** message box, click **Yes**.
21. Verify that the message **Class full: Unable to enroll student: Class: 3C** is displayed, and then click **OK**.
22. In the **Assign Student** window, click **Close**.
23. Click **Log off**.
24. Close the application.
25. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, you should have created a new custom exception class and used it to report when too many students are enrolled in a class.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
