# Module 2: Creating Methods, Handling Exceptions, and Monitoring Applications

## Lab: Extending the Class Enrollment Application Functionality

### Lab Setup

Estimated Time: **90 minutes**

### Preparation Steps

1. Ensure that you have cloned the 20483C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for this course's labs and demos. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20483-Programming-in-C-Sharp/tree/master/Allfiles**)
2. Prepare your database:
   - Open File Explorer and navigate to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod02\Labfiles\Databases**.
   - Double-click on **SetupSchoolDB.cmd**.
   - If a Windows protected your PC dialog appears, click **More info** and then click **Run Anyway**.
   - Close File Explorer.

### Exercise 1: Refactoring the Enrollment Code

#### Task 1: Copy the code for editing a student into the studentsList_MouseDoubleClick event handler

1. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository root]\Allfiles\Mod02\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **School.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. On the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
5. Double-click the **// TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1a: Copy code for editing the details for that student** task, below the comment locate the code, and then copy the following code to the clipboard:
    ```cs
    Student student = this.studentsList.SelectedItem as Student;

    // TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3a: Refactor as the editStudent method

    // Use the StudentForm to display and edit the details of the student
    StudentForm sf = new StudentForm();

    // Set the title of the form and populate the fields on the form with the details of the student
    sf.Title = "Edit Student Details";
    sf.firstName.Text = student.FirstName;
    sf.lastName.Text = student.LastName;
    sf.dateOfBirth.Text = student.DateOfBirth.ToString("d");

    // Format the date to omit the time element

    // Display the form
    if (sf.ShowDialog().Value)
    {
        // When the user closes the form, copy the details back to the student
        student.FirstName = sf.firstName.Text;
        student.LastName = sf.lastName.Text;
        student.DateOfBirth = DateTime.Parse(sf.dateOfBirth.Text);

        // Enable saving (changes are not made permanent until they are written back to the database)
        saveChanges.IsEnabled = true;
    }
    ```
6. Double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1b: If the user double-clicks a student, edit the details for the student** task.
7. Paste the code from the clipboard into **studentsList_MouseDoubleClick** method.

#### Task 2: Run the application and verify that the user can now double-click a student to edit their details

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu** and then press Enter.
4. Verify that the **Edit Student Details** window appears, displaying the correct details.
5. In the **Last Name** text box, delete the existing contents, type **Cook**, and then click **OK**.
6. Verify that **Liu** has changed to **Cook** in the student list, and that the **Save Changes** button is now enabled.
7. Double-click the row containing the name **George Li**.
8. Verify that the **Edit Student Details** window appears, displaying the correct details.
9. In the **First Name** text box, delete the existing contents, and then type **Darren**.
10. In the **Last Name** text box, delete the existing contents, type **Parker**, and then click **OK**.
11. Verify that **George Li** has changed to **Darren Parker**.
12. Close the application.

#### Task 3: Refactor the logic that adds and deletes a student into the AddNewStudent and DeleteStudent and EditStudent methods

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3a: Refactor as the AddNewStudent method** task.
2. In the code editor, locate the **case Key.Insert:** block, and then highlight the following code:
    ```cs
    // TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3a: Refactor as the addNewStudent method

    // Use the StudentsForm to get the details of the student from the user
    sf = new StudentForm();

    // Set the title of the form to indicate which class the student will be added to (the class for the currently selected teacher)
    sf.Title = "New Student for Class " + teacher.Class;

    // Display the form and get the details of the new student
    if (sf.ShowDialog().Value)
    {
        // When the user closes the form, retrieve the details of the student from the form

        // and use them to create a new Student object
        Student newStudent = new Student();
        newStudent.FirstName = sf.firstName.Text;
        newStudent.LastName = sf.lastName.Text;
        newStudent.DateOfBirth = DateTime.Parse(sf.dateOfBirth.Text);

        // Assign the new student to the current teacher
        this.teacher.Students.Add(newStudent);

        // Add the student to the list displayed on the form
        this.studentsInfo.Add(newStudent);

        // Enable saving (changes are not made permanent until they are written back to the database)
        saveChanges.IsEnabled = true;
    }
    ```
3. On the **Edit** menu, point to **Refactor**, and then click **Extract Method**.
4. In the code editor rename the "NewMethod" to "AddNewStudent" and then click **Apply**.
5. Locate the **AddNewStudent** method and in the method, modify the **sf = new StudentForm();** code to look like the following code:
    ```cs
    StudentForm sf = new StudentForm();
    ```
6. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3b: Refactor as the removeStudent method** task.
7. In the code editor, locate the **case Key.Delete** block, and cut the following code to the clipboard:
    ```cs
    // TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3b: Refactor as the removeStudent method

    // Prompt the user to confirm that the student should be removed
    MessageBoxResult response = MessageBox.Show(
    String.Format("Remove {0}", student.FirstName + " " + student.LastName),
    "Confirm",
    MessageBoxButton.YesNo,
    MessageBoxImage.Question,
    MessageBoxResult.No);

    // If the user clicked Yes, remove the student from the database
    if (response == MessageBoxResult.Yes)
    {
        this.schoolContext.Students.DeleteObject(student);

        // Enable saving (changes are not made permanent until they are written back to the database)
        saveChanges.IsEnabled = true;
    }
    ```
8. In the code editor, in the **case Key.Delete:** block, click at the end of the **student = this.studentsList.SelectedItem as Student;** code line, press Enter, then type the following code:
    ```cs
    RemoveStudent(student);
    ```
9. Right-click the **RemoveStudent(student);** method call, point to **Quick Action and Refactorings..**, and then click **Generate method 'MainWindow.RemoveStudent'**.
10. Locate the **RemoveStudent** method below the **studentsList_KeyDown** method, delete all the generated code in this method, and then paste the code from the clipboard.
11. Double-click the **// TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3c: create Edit student method** task below the comment, add the following code:
    ```cs
    private void EditStudent(Student student)
    {

    }
    ```
12. Double-click the **// TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3d: Refactor as the EditStudent method** task, below the comment locate the code, and cut the following code to the clipboard:
    >**Note :** Make sure the cursor is in StudentList_KeyDown method.
    ```cs
    // TODO: Exercise 1: Task 3d: Refactor as the EditStudent method

    // Use the StudentsForm to display and edit the details of the student
    StudentForm sf = new StudentForm();

    // Set the title of the form and populate the fields on the form with the details of the student
    sf.Title = "Edit Student Details";
    sf.firstName.Text = student.FirstName;
    sf.lastName.Text = student.LastName;
    sf.dateOfBirth.Text = student.DateOfBirth.ToString("d"); // Format the date to omit the time element

    // Display the form
    if (sf.ShowDialog().Value)
    {
        // When the user closes the form, copy the details back to the student
        student.FirstName = sf.firstName.Text;
        student.LastName = sf.lastName.Text;
        student.DateOfBirth = DateTime.Parse(sf.dateOfBirth.Text);

        // Enable saving (changes are not made permanent until they are written back to the database)
        saveChanges.IsEnabled = true;
    }
    ```
13. Replace the code with the following code:
    ```cs
    EditStudent(student);
    ```
14. Paste the code that you cut from the previous task to the **EditStudent** method.
15. Locate the **studentsList_MouseDoubleClick** method and replace the code inside the method with the following code:
    ```cs
    Student student = this.studentsList.SelectedItem as Student;
    EditStudent(student);
    ```

#### Task 4: Verify that students can still be added and removed from the application

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu**, and then press Insert.
4. Verify that the **New Student for Class 3C** window appears.
5. In the **First Name** text box, type **Dominik**.
6. In the **Last Name** text box, type **Dubicki**.
7. In the **Date of Birth** text box, type **02/03/2006** and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that **Dominik Dubicki** has been added to the student list.
9. Click the row containing the name **Run Liu**, and then press Delete.
10. Verify that the confirmation prompt appears.
11. Click **Yes**, and then verify that **Run Liu** is removed from the student list.
12. Close the application.

#### Task 5: Debug the application and step into the new method calls

1. In the code editor, locate the **studentsList_KeyDown** method, right-click the **switch (e.key)** statement, point to **Breakpoint**, and then click **Insert Breakpoint**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Debugging**.
3. Click the row that contains the name **Kevin Liu** and press Enter.
4. In **Visual Studio**, click the **Call Stack** tab.
5. Note that the current method name is displayed in the **Call Stack** window.
6. In **Visual Studio**, click the **Locals** tab.
7. Note that the local variables, **this**, **sender**, and **e**, are displayed in the **Locals** window.
8. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
9. Repeat step 8.
10. Look at the **Locals** window, and note that after stepping over the **Student student = this.studentsList.SelectedItem as Student;** code, the value for the **student** variable has changed from **null** to **School.Data.Student**.
11. In the **Locals** window, expand **student** and note the values for **_FirstName** and **_LastName**.
12. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Into**.
13. Note that execution steps into the **EditStudent** method, and the name of this method has been added to the call stack.
14. In the **Locals** window, note that the local variables have been changed to **this**, **student**, and **sf**.
15. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
16. Repeat step 15, five times.
17. In the **Locals** window, expand **student** and note the values for **dateOfBirth**, **firstName**, and **lastName**.
18. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Out** to run the remaining code in the **editStudent** method and step out again to the calling method.
19. In the **Edit Student Details** window, click **Cancel**.
20. Note that execution returns to the **studentsList_KeyDown** method.
21. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
22. On the **Debug** menu, click **Continue**.
23. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu** and press Insert.
24. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
25. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Into**.
26. Note that execution steps into the **AddNewStudent** method.
27. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Out** to run the remaining code in the **AddNewStudent** method and step out again to the calling method.
28. In the **New Student for Class 3C** window, click **Cancel**.
29. Note that execution returns to the **studentsList_KeyDown** method.
30. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
31. On the **Debug** menu, click **Continue**.
32. Click the row containing the name **George Li** and press Delete.
33. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
34. Repeat step 33.
35. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Into**.
36. Note that execution steps into the **RemoveStudent** method.
37. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Out** to run the remaining code in the **RemoveStudent** method and step out again to the calling method.
38. In the **Confirm** message box, click **No**.
39. Note that execution returns to the **studentList_KeyDown** method.
40. On the **Debug** menu, click **Step Over**.
41. On the **Debug** menu, click **Continue**.
42. Close the application
43. In **Visual Studio**, on the **Debug** menu, click **Delete All Breakpoints**.
44. In the **Microsoft Visual Studio** message box, click **Yes**.
45. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

   >**Results:** After completing this exercise, you should have updated the application to refactor the duplicate code into reusable methods.

### Exercise 2: Validating Student Information

#### Task 1: Run the application and observe that student details that are not valid can be entered

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository root]\Allfiles\Mod02\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **School.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
4. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
5. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu**, and then press Insert.
6. Leave the **First Name** and **Last Name** text boxes empty.
7. In the **Date of Birth** text box, type **10/06/3012**, and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that a new row has been added to the student list, containing a blank first name, blank last name, and a negative age.
9. Close the application.

#### Task 2: Add code to validate the first name and last name fields

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2a: Check that the user has provided a first name** task.
2. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (String.IsNullOrEmpty(this.firstName.Text))
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The student must have a first name", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2b: Check that the user has provided a last name** task.
4. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    if (String.IsNullOrEmpty(this.lastName.Text))
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The student must have a last name", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```

#### Task 3: Add code to validate the date of birth

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3a: Check that the user has entered a valid date for the date of birth** task.
2. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:  
    ```cs
    DateTime result;

    if (!DateTime.TryParse(this.dateOfBirth.Text, out result))
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The date of birth must be a valid date", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3b: Verify that the student is at least 5 years old** task.
4. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    TimeSpan age = DateTime.Now.Subtract(result);

    if (age.Days / 365.25 < 5)
    {
        MessageBox.Show("The student must be at least 5 years old", "Error", MessageBoxButton.OK, MessageBoxImage.Error);
        return;
    }
    ```

#### Task 4: Run the application and verify that student information is now validated correctly

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu**, and then press Insert.
4. Leave the **First Name**, **Last Name**, and **Date of Birth** text boxes empty and click **OK**.
5. Verify that an error message appears containing the text **The student must have a first name**.
6. In the **Error** message box, click **OK**.
7. In the **new student** window, in the **First Name** text box, type **Darren**, and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that an error message appears containing the text **The student must have a last name**.
9. In the **Error** message box, click **OK**.
10. In the **new student** window, in the **Last Name** text box, type **Parker**, and then click **OK**.
11. Verify that an error message that says **The date of birth must be a valid date** appears.
12. In the **Error** message box, click **OK**.
13. In the **new student** window, in the **Date of Birth** text box, type **10/06/3012**, and then click **OK**.
14. Verify that an error message that says **The student must be at least 5 years old** appears.
15. On the **Error** message box, click **OK**.
16. In the **new student** window, in the **Date of Birth** text box, delete the existing date, type **10/06/2006**, and then click **OK**.
17. Verify that **Darren Parker** is added to the student list with an age appropriate to the current date.
18. Close the application.
19. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

   >**Results:** After completing this exercise, the student data will be validated before it is saved.

### Exercise 3: Saving Changes to the Class List

#### Task 1: Verify that data changes are not persisted to the database

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository root]\Allfiles\Mod02\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 3**, click **School.sln**, and then click **Open**.
   >**Note :** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
4. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
5. Click the row containing the name **Kevin Liu**.
6. Press Enter and verify that the **Edit Student Details** window appears displaying the correct details.
7. In the **Last Name** text box, delete the existing contents, type **Cook**, and then click **OK**.
8. Verify that **Liu** has changed to **Cook** in the student list, and that the **Save Changes** button is now enabled.
9. Click the row containing the student **George Li**, and then press Delete.
10. Verify that the confirmation prompt appears, and then click **Yes**.
11. Verify that **George Li** is removed from the student list.
12. Close the application.
13. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
14. Verify that the application displays the original list of students.
15. Verify that **Kevin Liu** appears in the list instead of **Kevin Cook** and **George Li** is back in the student list.
16. Close the application.

#### Task 2: Add code to save changes back to the database

1. In **Visual Studio**, in the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2a: Bring the System.Data and System.Data.Objects namespace into scope** task.
2. In the code editor, click in the blank line above the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    using System.Data;
    using System.Data.Objects;
    ```
3. In **Visual Studio**, in the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 2b: Save the changes by calling the SaveChanges method of the schoolContext object** task.
4. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    // Save the changes
    this.schoolContext.SaveChanges();

    // Disable the Save button (it will be enabled if the user makes more changes)
    saveChanges.IsEnabled = false;  
    ```

#### Task 3: Add exception handling to the code to catch concurrency, update, and general exceptions

1. In the code editor, enclose the code that you wrote in the previous task in a **try** block. Your code should look like the following:
    ```cs
    try
    {
        // Save the changes
        this.schoolContext.SaveChanges();

        // Disable the Save button (it will be enabled if the user makes more changes)
        saveChanges.IsEnabled = false;
    }
    ```
2. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 3a: If an OptimisticConcurrencyException occurs then another user has changed the same students earlier then overwrite their changes with the new data (see the lab instructions for details)** task.
3. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    catch (OptimisticConcurrencyException)
    {  
        // If the user has changed the same students earlier, then overwrite their changes with the new data
        this.schoolContext.Refresh(RefreshMode.StoreWins, schoolContext.Students);
        this.schoolContext.SaveChanges();
    }
    ```
4. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 3b: If an UpdateException occurs then report the error to the user and rollback (see the lab instructions for details)** task.
5. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    catch (UpdateException uEx)
    {
        // If some sort of database exception has occurred, then display the reason for the exception and rollback

        MessageBox.Show(uEx.InnerException.Message, "Error saving changes");
        this.schoolContext.Refresh(RefreshMode.StoreWins, schoolContext.Students);
    }
    ```
6. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 3: Task 3c: If some other sort of error has occurs, report the error to the user and retain the data so the user can try again - the error may be transitory (see the lab instructions for details)** task.
7. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment line, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    catch (Exception ex)
    {
        // If some other exception occurs, report it to the user
        MessageBox.Show(ex.Message, "Error saving changes");
        this.schoolContext.Refresh(RefreshMode.ClientWins, schoolContext.Students);
    }
    ```

#### Task 4: Run the application and verify that data changes are persisted to the database

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. Click the row containing the student **Kevin Liu**.
4. Press Enter, in the **Last Name** text box delete the existing contents, type **Cook**, and then click **OK**.
5. Verify that **Liu** has changed to **Cook** in the student list, and that the **Save Changes** button is now enabled.
6. Click **Save Changes** and verify that the **Save Changes** button is now disabled.
7. Click the row containing the student **George Li** and press Delete.
8. Verify that the confirmation prompt appears, and then click **Yes**.
9. Verify that the **Save Changes** button is now enabled.
10. Click **Save Changes** and verify that the button is now disabled.
11. Close the application.
12. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
13. Verify that the changes you made to the student data have been saved to the database and are reflected in the student list.
14. Close the application.
15. On the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

   >**Results:** After completing this exercise, modified student data will be saved to the database.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the  [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
