# Module 11: Integrating with Unmanaged Code

## Lab: Upgrading the Grades Report

### Lab Setup

Estimated Time: **60 minutes**

### Preparation Steps

1. Ensure that you have cloned the 20483C directory from GitHub. It contains the code segments for this course's labs and demos. (**https://github.com/MicrosoftLearning/20483-Programming-in-C-Sharp/tree/master/Allfiles**)
2. Initialize database:
    - In the **Apps** list, click **File Explorer**.
    - In **File Explorer**, navigate to the **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Databases** folder, and then double-click **SetupSchoolGradesDB.cmd**.
        > **Note :** If a Windows protected your PC dialog appears, click More info and then click Run Anyway.
    - Close **File Explorer**.

### Exercise 1: Generating the Grades Report by Using Word

#### Task 1: Examine the WordWrapper class that provides a functional wrapper around the dynamic (COM) API for Word

1. Open **Visual Studio 2017**.
2. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
3. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**, click **Grades.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    > **Note:** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
4. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Solution ‘Grades’**, and then click **Properties**.
5. In the **Solutions ‘Grades’ Properties Pages** dialog box, click **Multiple startup projects**. Set **Grades.Web** and **Grades.WPF** to **Start**, and then click **OK**.
6. In **Solution Explorer**, expand **Grades.Utilities**, and then double-click **WordWrapper.cs**.
7. Examine the code that is currently contained within this class.
8. On the **View** menu, click **Task List**.
9. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1a: Create a dynamic variable called _word for activating Word** task.
10. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
     dynamic _word = null;
    ```
11. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1b: Instantiate _word as a new Word Application object** task.
12. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    this._word = new Application { Visible = false };
    ```
13. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1c: Create a new Word document** task.
14. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    var doc = this._word.Documents.Add();
    doc.Activate();
    ```
15. In the **Task List** window, double-click **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1d: Save the document using the specified filename**task.
16. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    var currentDocument = this._word.ActiveDocument;
    currentDocument.SaveAs(filePath);
    ```
17. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 1e: Close the document** task.
18. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    currentDocument.Close();
    ```

#### Task 2: Review the code in the GeneratedStudentReport method to generate a Word document

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2a: Generate a student grade report as a Word document**task.
2. Examine the code that is in this method to generate the student report.
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 1: Task 2b: Generate the report by using a separate task** task.
4. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    Task.Run(() => GenerateStudentReport(SessionContext.CurrentStudent, dialog.FileName));
    ```

#### Task 3: Build and test the application

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
3. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
4. Click **Kevin Liu**, and then click **save report**.
5. In the **Save As** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 1**.
6. In the **File name** text box, delete the existing contents, type **Kevin Liu Grades Report**, and then click **Save**.
7. Close the application, and then in **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.
8. Open **File Explorer**, browse to the **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise1** folder, and then verify that the report has been generated.
9. Double-click **Kevin Liu Grades Report.docx**.
10. Review the grade report, and then close **Microsoft Word**.

> **Result:** After completing this exercise, the application will generate grade reports in the **docx** format.

### Exercise 2: Controlling the Lifetime of Word Objects by Implementing the Dispose Pattern

#### Task 1: Run the application to generate a grades report and view the Word task in Task Manager

1. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, point to **Open**, and then click **Project/Solution**.
2. In the **Open Project** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**, click **Grades.sln**, and then click **Open**.
    > **Note:** If any Security warning dialog box appears, clear **Ask me for every project in this solution** check box and then click **OK**.
3. In **Solution Explorer**, right-click **Solution ‘Grades’**, and then click **Properties**.
4. In the **Solutions ‘Grades’ Properties Pages** dialog box, click **Multiple startup projects**, set **Grades.Web** and **Grades.WPF** to **Start**, and then click **OK**.
5. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
6. On the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
7. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
8. Click **Kevin Liu**, and then click **save report**.
9. In the **Save As** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**.
10. In the **File name** text box, delete the existing contents, type **Kevin Liu Grades Report**, and then click **Save**.
11. Close the application.
12. Open **File Explorer**, browse to the **[Repository Root]\Allfiles\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2** folder, and then verify that the report has been generated.

#### Task 2: Update the WordWrapper class to terminate Word correctly

1. In **Visual Studio**, in the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2a: Specify that the WordWrapper class implements the IDisposable interface** task.
2. In the code editor, on the line below the comment, click at the end of the **public class WordWrapper** code, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    :IDisposable
    ```
3. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2b: Create the protected Dispose(bool) method** task.
4. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    protected virtual void Dispose(bool isDisposing)
    {
        if (!this.isDisposed)
        {
            if (isDisposing)
            {
                // Release managed resources here
                if (this._word != null)
                {
                    this._word.Quit();
                }
            }

            // Release unmanaged resources here
            if (this._word != null)
            {
                System.Runtime.InteropServices.Marshal.ReleaseComObject(this._word);
            }

            this.isDisposed = true;
        }
    }
    ```
5. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2c: Create the public Dispose method** task.
6. In the code editor, click at the end of the comment, press Enter, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    public void Dispose()
    {
        this.Dispose(true);
        GC.SuppressFinalize(this);
    }
    ```
7. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 2d: Create a finalizer that calls the Dispose method** task.
8. In the code editor, click in the blank line below the comment, and then type the following code:
    ```cs
    private bool isDisposed = false;
    ```

#### Task 3: Wrap the object that generates the Word doc in a using statement

1. In the **Task List** window, double-click the **TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3: Ensure that the WordWrapper is disposed when the method finishes** task.
2. Below the comment, modify the **WordWrapper wrapper = new WordWrapper();** code to look like the following:
    ```cs
    using (var wrapper = new WordWrapper())
    {
    ```
3. At the end of the method, after the **wrapper.SaveAs(reportPath);** line of code, add a closing brace to end the **using** block.
4. Your code should look like the following:
    ```cs
    public void GenerateStudentReport(LocalStudent studentData, string reportPath)
    {
        // TODO: Exercise 2: Task 3: Ensure that the WordWrapper is disposed when the method finishes
        using (var wrapper = new WordWrapper())
        {
            // Create a new Word document in memory
            wrapper.CreateBlankDocument();

            // Add a heading to the document
            wrapper.AppendHeading(String.Format("Grade Report: {0} {1}", studentData.FirstName, studentData.LastName));
            wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
            wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();

            // Output the details of each grade for the student
            foreach (var grade in SessionContext.CurrentGrades)
            {
                wrapper.AppendText(grade.SubjectName, true, true);
                wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
                wrapper.AppendText("Assessment: " + grade.Assessment, false, false);
                wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
                wrapper.AppendText("Date: " + grade.AssessmentDateString, false, false);
                wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
                wrapper.AppendText("Comment: " + grade.Comments, false, false);
                wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
                wrapper.InsertCarriageReturn();
            }

            // Save the Word document
            wrapper.SaveAs(reportPath);
        }
    }
    ```

#### Task 4: Use Task Manager to observe that Word terminates correctly after generating a report

1. On the **Build** menu, click **Build Solution**.
2. Right-click the **taskbar**, and then click **Task Manager**.
3. In **Visual Studio**, on the **Debug** menu, click **Start Without Debugging**.
4. When the application loads, in the **Username** text box, type **vallee**, and in the **Password** text box, type **password99**, and then click **Log on**.
5. Click **Kevin Liu**, and then click **save report**.
6. In the **Save As** dialog box, browse to **[Repository Root]\Mod11\Labfiles\Starter\Exercise 2**.
7. In the **File name** text box, delete the existing contents, and then type **Kevin Liu Grades Report**.
8. As you click **Save**, in the **Task Manager** window, watch the **Processes** and verify that **Microsoft Word** appears and then disappears from the list.
9. Close **Task Manager** and then close the application.
10. In **Visual Studio**, on the **File** menu, click **Close Solution**.

>**Result:** After completing this exercise, the application will terminate **Word** correctly after it has generated a grades report.

©2018 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are  **not**  included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided &quot;as-is.&quot; Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
